OEP-57: Core Repositories (#312)
openedx/open-edx-proposals: oeps/processes/oep-0057-core-repositories.rst

===========================
OEP-57: Core Repositories
===========================

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75

   * - OEP-57

>      - :doc:`OEP-57 <oep-0057-core-repositories>`

Reviewer: Nit: According to the OEP spec, you should be putting `proc` in the document name (`oep-0057-proc-core-repositories`, see https://github.com/openedx/open-edx-proposals/tree/master/oeps/processes - all (except oep-1 lolol, and oep-54 where I also missed the notice) and https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/processes/oep-0001.html#oep-header-preamble)

To best accomodate both these interests in a fair and inclusive way, this OEP aims to:

* establish the purpose of the openedx GitHub organization,
* define a transparent process for the management of the organization's set of repositories, and
* explain how community members can prepare their repositories for inclusion in the organization.

Definition of Core Repositories
-------------------------------

* We define the *Core repositories of Open edX* (or in this context, "the Core") as the entire set of public repositories hosted in the `openedx GitHub organization`_.

  * Phrased another way: A repository is in the Core if and only if it is public and in the openedx GitHub organization.

  * Terminology notes:

    * The choice of *Core* here is inspired by the Core Contributor program, which exists in part to grant community members access to repositories in the openedx GitHub organization.

    * This does not preclude other, smaller "cores" of Open edX (such as a *learning core*, *core utilities*, etc.) from existing within the Core repositories.

>   * **What repositories are in the Core?**

Author: I realize that these criteria leave a gray area between repositories that *must* be in the core, but don't follow the standards for repositories that *may* be in the core.

I have some thoughts on how to reconcile this but am curious what others think.

    * A repository *must* be in the Core if it is directly included in `latest Open edX release`_.

    * A repository *must* be in the Core if:

      * it is listed as a non-optional base dependency of a repository included in the latest Open edX release *and*

>       * it is *not* maintained as a third-party package that is unspecific to Open edX, such as Django or Python Requests.

Reviewer 2: Nit: I think "unspecific" means vague/not well defined, and that what we'd want here is "not specific to Open edX". (Or maybe "nonspecific"? I never use that one.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      * it is *not* maintained as a third-party package separately from Open edX, such as Django or Python Requests.
```

>     * In addition to the repositories that must be in the Core, a repository *may* be in the Core if:

Reviewer 2: Instead of saying that there is a Core with some repos that _must_ be in Core and some that _may_ be in Core, with (Core == openedx GitHub org), would it be useful to define tiers of repos that will end up in the openedx GitHub org? Something like:

* Core
* Supporting
* ...?

I realize that's somewhat at odds with the notion of aligning this language to "Core Contributors". I'm wondering if we have other kinds of information we want to convey in how we group these repositories–how actively they're developed, for instance. We've also maintained a number of forks of external open source projects over the years for upgrade or compatibility reasons, and I think it's confusing to lump that in as "Core".

Reviewer 3: I am not sure if directly aligning this with the "core contributors" language is a good idea if there isn't a 1:1 mapping. I like Dave's tiers idea, or even some qualitative schema like github topics. I think we would need to clean up and track our topic schema for sure, but it could provide a nice way to, say, group together a set of MFEs that are part of a consolidated effort to deprecate something (and are thus optional but collectively required if you remove the deprecated app). I'm thinking specifically of the instructor dash MFE project that 2U and OpenCraft will be collaborating on.

>       * it is of interest to more than one entity the Open edX community (TODO: this needs better criteria); and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      * it is of interest to more than one entity in the Open edX community (TODO: this needs better criteria); and
```

>       * it has assigned `maintainers`_ who strive to:

Reviewer 4: This only applies to code repos.  We also have project repos (working group backlogs, etc).

        * review community code contributions,
        * participate in community discussions related to the repository, and

>         * keep the repository compliant with the accepted Open edX Proposals (OEPs).

Author: maybe I should drop just these requirements, and instead make sure they're in the list of maintenance responsibilities that OEP-0055 lays out.

* We declare that all access to write, configure, or otherwise administer Core repositories shall be granted through the `Core Contributor Program`_ and managed by its Program Administrators.

> * We declare that the addition or removal of repositories from the Core should by reviewed by existing Core Contributors.

Reviewer: As far as the process goes - we've been having trouble getting more than 30-40% of any given core contributors to participate in any CC program survey or standup we arrange. I think it would be good to, like the CC nomination process, define a minimum number of votes. The process should be public, where anyone can weigh in but only CCs get votes. Time-bounded is good. Would we specifically want maintainers to weigh in (who are already CCs)? Defining a rough template of how a repo "applies" for admission may be nice: repo name, purpose, core development team, who in the community is using it, plans for future development, and plan for maintainership all come to mind.

Reviewer: I think having two voting mechanisms, "affirmative consent +N" defined as requiring N positive votes and no negatives, & "lazy assent: X days" as a time-bounded default acceptance of X days given no negatives, makes sense to me! What do you think would be the best way to define these? The absolute shortest OEP ever? 😁

  * TODO: Define a review process.

> 

Reviewer 3: per [Sarina's comment](https://github.com/openedx/open-edx-proposals/pull/312/files#r816002374)

```suggestion

We recognize that, at the time of writing, there exist repositories that must be in the core, but don't follow the standards for repositories that may be in the core. These repositories will be identified by the Core Contributor team, and go through a similar review process as defined above - with the express goal of finding active maintainers for each repo.
```

Reasoning
---------

Many other repositories exist as part of the Open edX community. Some of these are forks of Core repositories, and others are upstream repositories in their own right. These various non-Core repositories are vital to different Open edX community members. Furthermore, the existence of non-Core repositories in general is important to the health of the Open edX project, which thrives on collaboration, experimentation, and extension.

> However, from these many repositories, we wish to enumerate a smaller set which:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, from these many repositories, we wish to enumerate a smaller set that:
```

> * is a good target for enhancement, documentation, and technical investment;

Reviewer: nit: before the bullets you use `repositories... which`, so your verbs at the beginning of bullets should be plural. eg, s/is a good target/are good targets/

Reviewer: Ah, got it. Yeah for some reason it does read awkwardly (to me); I actually think then the problem is the `which`. "we wish to enumerate a smaller set **which** is a good target" vs "we wish to enumerate a smaller set **that** is a good target"

Reviewer 3: I agree but also agree it's not a blocker. Offered a suggestion if you want to fold it in, @kdmccormick

* defines a logical boundary within which it is fair to enforce Open edX Proposals;

* defines an administrative boundary within which the Core Contributor Program applies;

* makes the Open edX project more comprehensible by collecting its most critical components;

> * (TODO: should I add something about tCRIL stewardship/ownership?); and

Reviewer: along what lines were you thinking?

* encompasses the first-party aspect of the Open edX release supply chain, identifying repositories that need to be:

  * monitoried for discloures under the `Open edX security policy`_,
  * regularly updated with security patches,
  * covered by automated unit tests and static analysis, and
  * ready to deploy to production at any time.

> Considerations

Author: Yeah, I don't intend for this section to be present in the final OEP.

--------------

> * Resolving legacy processes and access policies

Reviewer: Nit: I would make these subsection, not nested bullets.

```
Resolving legacy processes and access policies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

>   * The process for reviewing addition/removal of repos via the Core Contributor program isn't ready to be spun up yet or even well-defined. In the meantime, tCRIL has been making these judgement calls.

Author: Yeah. I should have included the whole **Considerations** section in the PR description, not the OEP. It's meant to be a conversation with the folks previewing this OEP, not contents of the final OEP itself.

  * 2U OCM and some of tCRIL retain historical access to many Core repositories outside of the Core Contributor program process. There is a plan to bring those folks under the Core Contributor umbrella, but it will take time.
  * tCRIL is currently using a few public repositories in the openedx organization for day-to-day work, such as ``openedx/tcril-engineering``. Upon acceptance of this OEP, they would need to make a new GitHub organization for those repositories.

> * Cleaning up the Core

Reviewer 5: This seems like it should be in a consequences section?

>   * Many repositories in the openedx GitHub organization do not currently meet the Core criteria. We will need to review the organization contents, and for several repos, transfer them out or invest in them.

Reviewer: Nit: here - and any other place you describe current state - could you possibly say something like `do not (at time of initial OEP authoring)` or `do not (as of early 2022)`? I find OEPs are often not revisited and language like this change, potentially leading people reading this in the future to think this sentence describes the "current state" at that moment in time.

Author: Yes, this entire section will be rewritten before the proper review period.

>   * Even so, the definition of the Core still captures a large number of repositories, probably larger than we want our "Core" to be. We could reduce it by loosening the package dependencies of many services to being optional instead of strictly required.

Reviewer 5: I wonder if it will be valuable to have a second org for the looser but still close to core repos.  For example repos tha aren't required but that are defacto the way you do X if you don't have other opinions?  Even if X plugs into an interface.

The idea of `openedx-contrib` as an org popped into my head as I was reading this so just mentioning it.

Reviewer 2: I think it might be easier to use [topics](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/customizing-your-repository/classifying-your-repository-with-topics) to tier the repos into different categories.

Reviewer 2: I just feel like it would be painful to maintain sync with users, groups, settings and such across a second org. Or dealing with moving repos around between those orgs.

Reviewer 2: We only use topics on a few repos now, and we use them in an inconsistent manner. But we could be more disciplined about it and make it something that folks could reasonably filter on, e.g. https://github.com/orgs/openedx/repositories?q=topic%3Afrontend&type=all&language=&sort=

Reviewer 3: I think it's worth holding off on a specific solution for this to see how things shake out with the maintainers and core changes. It might be that each contributing org maintains its own separate collection, or that the peripheral libraries fall clearly into guilds by topic. I'm just spitballing here but basically I think we should shift these core things and then see what the new emergent patterns are.

Reviewer 3: One small update on this idea--as 2U starts thinking about [pilots for OEP-55](https://github.com/edx/open-source-process-wg/issues/32) I'm realizing that one of our pain points is the way that our internal "ownership" spreadsheet scope is defined, which is basically "anything on the openedx or edx orgs". Arguably that definition will not scale, but I also can't think of a good alternative. Maybe org-based maintainership gets encoded as a tag? e.g. I can filter for all the repos currently maintained by 2U. That would allow us to continue to automate some of our ownership stuff without having to do weird things like duplicate the entire maintainer roster in our spreadsheet (which currently only lists teams internal to 2U).

* Ensuring the Core contains everything it should

>   * There are four repositories directly included in Maple that aren't in the openedx organization. We'll either need to remove them from the release or transfer them into openedx.

Reviewer 3: Where are we at on this for Nutmeg?

  * This will take a while, but we'll need to look at the list of packages that are depended upon by released repositories. If any of them are Open edX code but outside the openedx organization, we'll need to move them into openedx, or refactor the dependencies so that they're optional.

Motivation
----------

TODO

> Alternatives Considered

Reviewer 4: The big picture of this OEP as I understand it is:
- Define criteria for a set of repos to be called Core, and
- Make that set be the same as the openedx GitHub set.

I'm wondering if it's a good idea to join those two ideas together.  As [Dave commented](https://github.com/openedx/open-edx-proposals/pull/312/files#r819158716), orgs imply access administrations, and as [Sarina pointed out](https://github.com/openedx/open-edx-proposals/pull/312/files#r816013821), there will be data to migrate if some repos have to be moved.

Couldn't we find other ways of clearly indicating what is Core?  As written, this OEP will require making yet another organization (or maybe more than one?) The phrase "open edx" refers to a software platform, but also a project.  Why shouldn't the openedx organization include repos that are in the project but not the platform?

Reviewer 4: It might make the proposal more concrete if we could see a dry-run of what would have to move.  What repos need to move into the openedx org, what repos would need to move out, and where they would go.

-----------------------

TODO

Change History
--------------

2022-03-XX
==========

* Document created in `initial pull request`_.

.. _openedx GitHub organization: https://github.com/openedx
.. _security policy: https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/security/policy
.. _latest Open edX release: ./oep-0010-proc-openedx-releases.rst
.. _maintainers: ./oep-0055-project-maintainers.rst

> .. _Core Contributor Program: ./oep-0054-core-contributors.rst

Reviewer: Q: does this relative linking work in the RTD site? I've only seen explicit links in other OEPs.
